stokes: Hello.
stokes: Let's see, let's give, maybe just another minute or two, and we'll get started.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Josh, if you're helping with the stream, then I'm ready when you are.
Josh Davis: Stream's live, go ahead.
stokes: Okay, thanks.
stokes: Hey everyone, welcome to ACDC number 173. It is issue 1874 in the PM repo.
stokes: There's a link to the agenda that I just put in the chat.
stokes: So…
stokes: Yeah, today, just one quick housekeeping thing with Fusaka and the IPs, then we'll touch on Glamsterdam and Hagotov.
stokes: So, yeah, otherwise, it's a pretty short agenda, so yeah, let's get into it.
stokes: To kick things off.
stokes: Pooja has a request, to adjust some of the statuses of a few EIPs from Fusaka.
stokes: I don't know if Pooja's on this call, but let me just grab a link to this comment.
stokes: It was EIP7607, 77723, 7594, and 7918, and I think they just need to have, the status changed.
stokes: But yeah, if you were involved with one of those EIPs, please take a look.
stokes: And yeah, we'll get that… Cut it up.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Next then, we'll turn to Glamsterdam, and yeah, so I think the main thing for today is to discuss EPBS and the progress there.
stokes: There was also a request to mention an engine API,
stokes: issue, let's say, for BLs, but…
stokes: First, let's have a little chat about EPBS.
stokes: So…
stokes: Yeah, I mean, maybe a good place to start would just be to ask, where clients are at. I know we had the spec changes that we were working through, even into the end of last year.
stokes: And, you know, the next step now would be the EPVS DevNote 0.
stokes: I don't believe we have the 7.0, and yeah, I think it'd be good to have a conversation about how we want to get there.
stokes: So, any CL clients want to chime in?
Stefan Bratanov: I can speak from ECHO.
Stefan Bratanov: So… we have, basically, we're passing the spec ref test from Alpha 4.1.
Stefan Bratanov: Apart from the folk choice tests.
Stefan Bratanov: So, we're pretty much in the same situation as we were before the holidays, but just passing the new specs.
Stefan Bratanov: So, yeah, we're working towards, DevNet Zero.
Stefan Bratanov: But, still not sure exactly.
Stefan Bratanov: Of any timeline.
stokes: Cool, thanks.
stokes: Any other clients want to give an update?
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Barnabas, you put some notes here on specs. Do you want to say anything else about that?
Barnabas: Yeah, so you basically,
Barnabas: dial down the specs to be 1.7.0-alpha.1 for DevNet0, and most likely it's going to be Alpha 2 for DevNet1.
Barnabas: I included the CSPAC PRs that are attached to each of these scopes, and hopefully we can discuss that.
Barnabas: There's a couple of open PRs still, 4843.
Barnabas: Duck.
stokes: Yeah, I can grab them. It's 4843, and it looks like 4826.
Barnabas: Yep, exactly. So the 4843, seems to be…
Barnabas: pretty much good to go, and pretty much good to be merged in. And the other one is, really the questionable one.
stokes: Correct.
stokes: And yeah, I mean, the way that you have it here, those would be in DevNet1, so we have some time to resolve those, and then there's a solid target for DevNet 0.
Barnabas: Right, but, yeah, it would be very good to… to have some timeline discussion, regarding EPBS, because it's been delaying for a very long time, and
Barnabas: based on new inclined updates, it just doesn't seem like it's going anywhere. I'm hoping we can, like,
Barnabas: We can discuss specific deadlines for DevNets.
stokes: Yeah, I mean, I think we should get into it. One…
stokes: Comment from Kini, just in terms of client updates.
stokes: Yeah, Lighthouse is making good progress, no firm timing yet, but yeah, they're making good progress in terms of Lighthouse Network.
stokes: So…
stokes: Yeah, I mean, I think that is an important thing to get into here, is just the timing, so we can align on how we're thinking about things.
stokes: you know, I think one place to start is…
stokes: We had this meta of 2 forks per year.
stokes: So, from where we are today, you know, I would be curious how clients think about this.
stokes: a proposal I could just toss out there.
stokes: you know, following that, timing of two forks a year would be Leinster Dam sometime in the summer, you know, between June…
stokes: July, possibly even August.
stokes: From there, you know, especially, I think, if we can agree to a time there, then we can work backwards and figure out where everything else needs to hit.
stokes: So yeah, I'd be curious for people's thoughts on that.
stokes: I think sticking to this would be important, again, just to keep,
stokes: Is anything predictability and regularity high?
stokes: And I do think if we're targeting the summer, then, yeah, you kind of go backwards from there.
stokes: It would be something like May-ish for testnets.
stokes: Meaning, DevNet development is done around April.
stokes: Meaning, you know, the beginning of DevNets, where we are now, needs to start progressing.
stokes: And, yeah, I mean, if we want to make it concrete, we could even go ahead and say, yeah, you know, we need DevNet Zero, say, in a month, and from there, I think things will kind of fall into place.
stokes: But, yeah, I'd be curious, how people feel about this today.
Barnabas: I think maybe it's not very clear what you're trying to communicate. Basically.
Barnabas: It's suggesting that we could consider doing a EL-only fork in the summer, in case EPPS is,
Barnabas: not able to… Shipping time.
Barnabas: Is that correct?
stokes: Yeah, well, this is an option on the table, which is why I want to kind of have this conversation, so…
stokes: Yeah, like, if we want to stick to two forks a year, and it gets to the place that, you know, really any AP is not ready, then we could just basically leave it out. It, by default, goes to the next fork.
stokes: And we proceed that way.
stokes: And yeah, that could be the case here in Clemssterdam. Again, I think BALs and things have progressed quite a bit further along than EPBS, so if we stick to this mid-year fork.
stokes: EPVS is not ready in time, that is an option on the table.
stokes: Botus.
Potuz: Yeah, so I can't give you any timelines for DevNets, nor… not even Kurtosis runs, but people are talking about an 100% increase on the size of the block because of BALs.
Potuz: I don't know how people think about that… without EPBS?
stokes: You're saying that you would have concerns without APBS, that it would be okay to make the blocks that big?
Potuz: My node today gets the median block over 2 seconds into the slot. If we double the size of the block.
Potuz: We still need to attest to it. Without a PBS, it sounds kind of crazy.
stokes: And this is just from the access list?
stokes: this double N you're talking about?
Potuz: Yeah, as far as I know, they were talking about having a 100% increase on BALs.
stokes: Yeah.
Toni Wahrstätter: I mean, this is true, but to be realistic, right, 100% sounds a lot here, but we are talking about 70 to 80 kilobytes with today's gas limit. So this is not even a blob.
Toni Wahrstätter: So I wouldn't… I wouldn't over-exaggerate it. Of course, on the EL side, data will be doubled.
Toni Wahrstätter: But, if you put it…
Toni Wahrstätter: Relative to the whole… to the total data throughput we already have. It's… It's negligible.
stokes: Ontario, you have your hand up.
Ansgar Dietrichs: Yeah, I mean, basically similar to what Tony just said, more just a bit general. Now, I really, really, really don't think we will ship an EL-only fork. I think that would be a really bad outcome.
Ansgar Dietrichs: I'm very optimistic that, you know, we'll just hit the timelines on both sides. But yeah, because the question was raised, I think because we have this unusual flexibility this fall, because of the repricings, we can just make these things
Ansgar Dietrichs: relative to each other, more or less expensive, data versus compute. And so, in this, like, just absolute, like, emergency outcome of having to ship a fork without the benefits, they're very important and very much looking forward to benefits of EPBS,
Ansgar Dietrichs: we would be able to do so, and basically just, end up having to reprice things slightly differently. We would be prepared for that, but again, to me, this is, like, a very, like, just…
Ansgar Dietrichs: Only emergency outcome, I don't think that's at all in the… And main path here.
stokes: Yeah, I mean, I do think it would be preferable to keep things as scheduled. It is an option if it comes to that.
stokes: Yeah, and so I think it's gonna be…
stokes: Yeah, I think it'll be, like, tricky to make this a firm commitment today.
stokes: At least going off, yeah, what Putin said, representing Prism.
stokes: Kini here with Lighthouse, so…
stokes: Yeah, at least from those comments, like…
stokes: Possible, but yeah, they don't want to commit to this today.
stokes: Any other clients have any input on this?
saulius: I just wanted to note that I think we have a bit of illusion of two hard forks per year, because we did that last year.
saulius: And we did that just because the PDAS was developed for a couple of years in parallel.
saulius: And, we don't have such thing, now. We just started to, implement,
saulius: EPBS, which is a really complex, thing, it touches so much in the client. So, yeah, I'm… I'm afraid that we…
saulius: It's… for this year, it's just an illusion to have two hard forks per year.
Parithosh Jayanthi: I think that's fair, though, because block-level access lists also got started developing around the same time, and they are mostly ready to hit 2 forks a year. Same with repricings.
saulius: Yeah, but I'm on CL side. I'm talking about CL side.
Parithosh Jayanthi: Well, that's more of a comment on scoping, right?
stokes: Yeah, I mean, I'm not proposing this, but you could imagine we change the scope of EPBS so that it's…
stokes: A smaller thing to ship faster.
stokes: Yeah.
stokes: Barnabas has a suggestion here on a timeline,
stokes: Let's see… so yeah, the BAL DevNets progress.
stokes: EPBS DevNet Zero, yeah, essentially a month from today, which then, a month after that, we'd get to the next DevNet and keep things moving.
stokes: This is a nice timeline. Of course, it needs to be possible.
stokes: And, you know, I think what I'd suggest… I'm sure, Barnabas, you want to add some context?
Barnabas: Yeah, so I would really, really, suggest that, we should do, like, a harsh deadline for the end of February, the 20th of February, for at least shipping EPBS DevNet Zero.
Barnabas: If we are unable to ship EPPS Definite Zero by the end of February, then I would consider pushing it to,
Barnabas: the H-star fork, and basically doing a EL only and repricing changes, fork in…
Barnabas: June, or maybe even sooner.
Barnabas: And then you can still ship EPPS by the end of the year.
stokes: Yeah.
stokes: It's an option.
stokes: Any responses to that?
stokes: So, if not, I think in terms of today,
stokes: Yeah, it does sound like, based on where we're at today, I would agree here, the post is saying, like, end of February, or at least, you know, not today, but with another sequence of calls.
stokes: We'll have a clearer idea.
stokes: I do think we should all have in mind, roughly, the schedule, again, just to keep things moving, so…
stokes: what that means for today is, like, you know, do our best to get to DevNet Zero, towards the end of February.
stokes: And, yeah, I think…
stokes: Given where we're at today, we'll know a lot more in the future, and we can have more clarity at that point in time.
stokes: And to be clear, there is this option that, you know, especially if we have a bunch of other things ready outside of EPBS, there would definitely be the option to explore
stokes: I'm shipping, quote, an yaw-only fork.
stokes: So… Let's keep that in mind.
Parithosh Jayanthi: Are there any implementation blockers or spec topics that need to be sorted out sooner rather than later that would help?
Potuz: Can you… can you specify what you're referring to, Pari?
Parithosh Jayanthi: I was asking, do we have everything required for implementation, or is there still gonna be…
Parithosh Jayanthi: something changing between now and DevNet Zero.
Potuz: No, I think it's… Definite Zero is already, spec'd out.
Potuz: And I think, finally, the spec is frozen in that sense, so we can actually now start… well, we are already coding, and we are already merging.
Potuz: So, a couple weeks ago, we actually started coding for this.
Parithosh Jayanthi: Perfect. Do you guys need anything from the testing team, or from PandaOps?
Potuz: Not for now, but in a couple of weeks, we'll be asking to have, like, our justice runs, I guess.
Parithosh Jayanthi: Okay, sounds good.
stokes: It's blocking on the kurtosis?
Potuz: Oh, there's no blocking, and we just need to code and merge.
stokes: Okay, yeah. And even, yeah, just going off of the DevNet Zero spec, there's the consistent specs here with the release, and there's one extra PR, it looks like, so…
stokes: That looks pretty straightforward. So, yeah, again, that's what I would say for today. Let's all try to keep this…
stokes: next milestone in mind of about a month from now, towards the end of February, and… yeah, let's see how it goes.
stokes: Does that sound good with everyone?
stokes: Enrico?
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Just, just a final, comment,
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): unrelated to APPS, so I want to just take one minute to share
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): a little description of what happened to Tegu Node's,
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): two weeks ago, around January 13, so if we are at the end of the call, I just want to share these things, so…
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Is this the good time? Is there anyone.
stokes: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, go ahead.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Okay.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): So, just a little, summarization of what happened. So, EEF run around E13.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): PM, UTC, a stress test on the mainnet, causing…
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): blob usage to spike, like, 2.5x.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Consider the average of… compared to the average of the moment.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): So, we have been reached by, several clients…
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): saying that Google's falling off and, producing empty slot logs.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): And we started a very long analysis, and we think we found some root causes of this. Essentially.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): This was happening only on some full custody nodes, not everyone, not every node. And the spike of blob usage caused, essentially columns to double, more than double in size, so overall data written to database doubled.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): And, we…
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): we hit some kind of threshold in the way we used LevelDB that was causing transaction rights to
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Slow down a lot.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): And this was causing a chain effect on our client, essentially.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Fully… filling up some queues on the database side, causing that availability to not being declared available.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Quick enough, even if we have already received the columns over the network, and so blocks 1 won't be…
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): imported, and…
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): all things off. So, we started… when we realized that LevelDB was the root cause, we started saying around, can you please switch to RoxDB if you're facing these problems?
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): And we are working on several mitigations, and we're also moving to RoxDB as default database and from the next release.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): But, yeah, just sharing the updates on what happened. I don't know how many was aware of this.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): So we are… This is a reason why also EPBS slow development was a little bit slowed down lately on our side. We were dealing with this analysis and issues.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): That's it.
stokes: Okay, thanks. And, yeah, any takeaways? I mean, Barnabas in particular has a question.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Oh, yes.
stokes: If we should wait with the blob testing?
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): We are working on some, diff… some… some approaches to mitigate everything, so… We could…
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Try to recreate the same problem, even if we synthetically recreated the same scenario.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Locally, by simulating a very slow transaction on database that actually triggered
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): all the chain effect that we saw on customer nodes, so I think, like, we know what the problem is now, and it's pretty internal and low level on Teku.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): So, we could run another spamming test again, but I would like to… maybe having also
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): all the mitigations and improvements already in place, to also being able to compare those mitigations in parallel, and see that there was
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): actually solved. So, maybe we can organize later, when everything is… is done.
stokes: Okay, thanks for the update.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Anything else on EPBS?
stokes: Again, just to play that back, it sounds like we're in a good place with the DevNet Zero specs.
stokes: Clients are busy implementing, and yeah, it would be good to see the DevNet as soon as possible.
stokes: At this point, I do think we should kind of just take it call by call and see how things progress. We should have a rough deadline in our heads of about a month from now.
stokes: And, yeah, we will navigate things as they go.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Then, Tony had a quick shout-out on this PR, concerning the Engine API and BILs. Tony, would you like to say something?
Toni Wahrstätter: Yeah, thanks, not really much to say about it, just as a heads up for CL clients that we changed something at the engine API previously. It required, like, two calls.
Toni Wahrstätter: to the EO, When it comes to helping other peers sync, and this will now just need one call.
Toni Wahrstätter: Because the block lab access list will just be attached.
Toni Wahrstätter: To the, execution payload.
Toni Wahrstätter: to the execution payload body. So it will be… it will have an execution payload body V2,
Toni Wahrstätter: And yeah, just please, check it out. Previously, we only used Lodestar for the first Defnet, and for DEFNET2, I think the plan was to use multiple clients already, and different clients handle it differently, as far as I know, so…
Toni Wahrstätter: Please have a look, and… those clients that are ready for DEFNET2, we can then already use them.
Toni Wahrstätter: Thank you.
stokes: Great. Yeah, and us would just have people review the PR.
Toni Wahrstätter: Yeah, review it and implement it.
stokes: Create… okay.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: So, yeah, everyone take a look.
stokes: Add that?
stokes: Anything else for Glamsterdam? I think that was all we had on the agenda.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Next then would be Hegata, and again, yeah,
stokes: Just to give a summary of where we're at there.
stokes: So, we've started the headliner proposal process for this fork.
stokes: So far, there's been a proposal on Ethan Magicians, at least a post for this, for Fossil.
stokes: And I think a new one since last time would be Encryptum Impulse, which I think, depending on how they're doing it, is probably more of an EL thing.
stokes: In any case, we have until February 4th.
stokes: For proposals to be submitted, it would be nice if champions of these proposals come to some ACD by the 4th of February, and give, you know, a very quick sort of pitch or overview of the proposal.
stokes: Yeah, then from there, we'll go to the headliner selection process.
stokes: And I think that was all I wanted to say there. We still have some time before the next phase of that.
stokes: And with that, I think this was all we needed to cover today.
stokes: Is there anything else we should discuss?
Barnabas: I might have something, so…
Barnabas: could we get, maybe, every CL team to, have a…
Barnabas: have a version for the Ball DevNets as well. I know that we currently have Lostar and Lighthouse only.
Barnabas: And I think it would be a good,
Barnabas: to… to be able to basically run all the sales, pitfalls as well.
stokes: And concretely, this would be a slot non implementation, just so they can join the DevNet?
Barnabas: That plus bolts. It should be fairly small.
stokes: Oh, right, yeah, yeah, okay.
Barnabas: Stuck out.
Barnabas: Yeah, Prism… Prism is not working. There was a working branch that…
Barnabas: might work for .NET0, but it no longer works, for sure. So it would be good to have a .NET2 spec ready for all the different CLs.
Barnabas: It should be a one-day effort for most people, I think. It's not a huge lift.
Barnabas: And then maybe later on, we can also iterate additional fields on top of that branch, and
Barnabas: because we still have a few CL-only changes,
Barnabas: If APVS is taking too long, then maybe you can include those CR changes on top of the ball.nets.
stokes: Yeah, so that was… So you said, presume there might be an issue with the branch right now?
stokes: And then we'll let Techu, Brandeen.
stokes: Who else am I missing? I missed the first two you said that were already there. Nimbus.
Barnabas: Nembos, Taku, and Grandin.
Barnabas: It would be great if they also took, like.
stokes: Okay. Some of them are on this call, so…
stokes: Can we get an acknowledgement?
stokes: Okay, we got a thumbs up, at least, from Svalius.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Ari hasn't asked here about partial salt proofs, that would be worth talking about, if the relevant people are here.
stokes: Is this mostly implementation and clients, Perry, or is there something else to talk about?
Parithosh Jayanthi: Yeah, an implementation status of plans, because as far as I knew, partial site pools is something we also plan on shipping this year, so…
Parithosh Jayanthi: I think it makes sense to discuss where we are with that.
stokes: Is any client looking at this?
Barnabas: Yeah, so I was just checking if maybe Raul was on the call, but…
Barnabas: I cannot seem to find him, so I can maybe give an update. We are launching a DevNet for the partial sales stuff,
Barnabas: We launched it yesterday, but the clients are still implementing the features. We have a Lighthouse implementation and a Prism implementation. They're, like, half-baked solutions at this point. We're still missing some,
Barnabas: Metrics, but it should be, getting close to interrupting.
Barnabas: And we are waiting for a Tecmo and Lodestar implementation, and we haven't heard from IMBUS yet.
Barnabas: But it's work in progress.
Parithosh Jayanthi: And is the plan that as soon as someone has it merged, they ship it, or will this happen at a fork boundary, or EPO boundary, or something like that?
Barnabas: This is still, under consideration, so we want to roll it out for DevNets, then, roll it out for testnets, and then after testnets, we can see if we have any other P2P issues, with clustering. If there's no issues, then, clients are free to roll it out at,
Barnabas: Whenever they roll out their next, stable release, it's…
stokes: Alright, Potis, your comment here was about… These partial salt proofs?
Potuz: Yeah, we have… but Marco is pushing PRs, and also some internal members are just working on this, and Casey, I think, is also working on this.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Yeah, in terms of moving forward here, it might be good to, like, point to some type of champion, and I think that's…
stokes: Yeah, likely either Raul or Marco, so yeah.
stokes: I can follow up with them and try to get them on a future call, and we can make sure we keep moving that forward as well.
Barnabas: Yeah, like, we cannot ship BPO3 without it. That's pretty obvious, I think.
Barnabas: So, we're gonna need to have every client implemented before we can ship PPS3.
stokes: Makes sense.
Barnabas: Could we also get an update, maybe, on 7688?
stokes: This is the Stable Containers EIP.
Barnabas: Yep, because most SSE libraries will have to update that.
Barnabas: That might also be a significant effort.
Etan (Nimbus): Yeah, so, tests are… ready in consensus backtest. Nimbus implementation is ready.
Etan (Nimbus): From Lighthouse, I heard that they are ready, and Lodestar results are ready.
Etan (Nimbus): Prism, Grandine, and Teco are aware, but they are still busy with the other stuff, from what I have heard from them.
Barnabas: Right, is it fair to assume that the implementation of the SSD containers is… can be done parallel to EPBS, and it's completely orthogonal?
Etan (Nimbus): It's a pure library change, it doesn't affect the consensus, client.
Barnabas: Is this something weird.
stokes: kind of…
Barnabas: Didn't the… didn't the ERP touch some of the types, though?
Etan (Nimbus): Yeah, I mean, the 7688 then applies the library changes to the types, but the library changes itself can be developed in parallel.
stokes: Right. Okay.
Etan (Nimbus): It's just like an annotation that you have to put on the type, and then it hashes the new way.
stokes: Potus, your hands up.
Potuz: Yeah, so, it's true that, we can, after we…
Potuz: added all the structures, we can just change the ZZ structures on the states. The only worry that I have is if it will affect our in-memory structure for the tree that we need to keep, because it changes how we hash things.
Potuz: I've been told that this is not so much of a change, but I still… I mean, bugs on the rehashing on the tree are always subtle to debug, so that'll be my only fear on this EIP.
stokes: Yeah, I mean, if we want to make progress here, it'd be worth someone who's not working, say, on EPBS to…
stokes: de-risk that point, POTUS, so someone who can move ahead about implementation, and yeah, you know, even just a little prototype, showing that that's not an issue would be useful.
stokes: I do think more generally, I'd rather us focus on EPPS and getting that to a good place, before the other CFI DIPs.
stokes: It is good to get a status update on this, though.
Barnabas: Anyone has looked into any other CL VIPs, by the way?
Barnabas: Because we still have a few more?
Barnabas: In terms of, like, implementation difficulties, or…
stokes: Yeah, I would guess not, but… I'd be keen to hear.
stokes: Okay, we gotta know.
stokes: From Teku, which is understandable. I imagine everyone's just very focused on EPBS at the moment.
stokes: Okay.
stokes: Anything else?
stokes: Otherwise, we'll go ahead and wrap up for the day.
stokes: Okay, and thanks, everyone. I'll see you next time. Goodbye.
Potuz: Mobile.
Enrico Del Fante (tbenr): Bye.
Justin Traglia: Sorry, everyone.
Justin Florentine (Besu): Also, plus encrypted mempools is gonna be fire.
Toni Wahrstätter: Bye bye.
Ansgar Dietrichs: Very important.